You just said the houseman collection.
The houseman collection, I would say, is not of primary importance.
When I have been friends, I've been a friend of a collector in Philadelphia whose library went to Pridmore, the college of Pridmore.
And because of my friendship with him, the Morgan Library invited solely on his collection, in their cases,
Would that be Seymour Adelman?
You know Seymour Adelman?
I know.
I'm doing my work, as you can see.
Of course.
Seymour was a beloved man.
They just smile and think of Seymour, who loves ice cream.
Well, anyhow, Seymour called me about two years before I died.
Father Monahan, he said, Morgan, I didn't want to show off my heart.
I said, this is not mine.
So anyhow, when?
They were showing off the catalog of the exhibition of the Morgan, so three institutions showing off.
We were number three, because my friend said it was Seymour.
We were number three, three out for showing off the collection.
So I had a digression in saying, a horseman collection is good, but who knows, it might get great all of a sudden, because you have opportunity to add to it.
a base, or anything between a corner, we have something before.
That's important.
And then the two together become like, let's say, the Jeffers.
We had a bridge of Jeffers, but now we have a fantastic Jeffers collection.
This is, the La Gallienne is also first-rate.
That's first-rate.
That is, I'm sure that Harvard and Columbia and others will have a great collection, but this is a very significant collection.
As I say, these are all manuscripts down here.
the manuscript value, the benefit if you're studying a text and find out that the printed text is quite different from the Office of Regional Work.
That's why we go to manuscripts, isn't it?
Right.
So, in fact, let's see.
So, when you go out looking, you're not just looking for targets of opportunity.
You have an idea of things that might support the curriculum, shall we say, number one?
Not really.
It's only after I see them, I would say, they support the collection.
so that I'm looking over someone's shelves.
That's pretty good.
Now, one of the things I want to stress is the booksellers are very important co-workers with me, with my friendship with them.
And because then they have given, many have given significant things to us.
The booksellers?
The booksellers, not so much they're going to phone me and say, look, I got this, I got that.
They give names together?
Well, they have.
For instance, could you name me Warren Howell, I imagine?
Warren Howell would be Warren Howell, but Howell and Barker, the two ladies.
Who are they then?
Hamill and Barker.
Hamill?
Hamill Francis Hamill, H-A-M-I-L-L.
Oh, she was famous, wasn't it?
And Marjorie Barker, M-A-R-G-E-R-Y Barker.
These were two ladies who were known in trade for years, Chicago.
They were Chicago dealers?
Chicago dealers.
Sellers or whatever.
They are both deceased now.
I was there in 1960, about to know them.
I was looking for Ellen Schaefer's book when I walked into the shop and Marjorie Barker came out
her dad's consent, by my hand, you'll never find it.
Take my copy.
You have that ascribed by Ellen when she gets it back home in California.
So now Francis Hamill, well, Marjorie died first of cancer.
And then she created a commission of trust to her partner and said, I have a certain amount of my estate.
I want to go to our favorite people in America.
Favorite what?
I'm one of four favorites on Francis and Martha.
So I got $200,000 as a trust fund.
Sounds like they were pretty successful booksellers.
Oh, they were very successful.
How did you establish this kind of friendship for people in Chicago?
Well, I would go there every year, and I'd come through seeing donors and possible donors and friends.
I'd say the thing grew.
To give you an example, I was up in the mountains on vacation this month in August, and this is the month that Francis and Marjorie would do their buying, going around.
And so they phoned me.
I was up in the mountains, and they said, we're here.
We just want to say hello.
We don't want to disturb you.
Just to say hello to you.
I said, how long do you want to be there?
Be here until next Friday.
I said, I'm coming down right now.
So, that sort of loyalty of friendship between friends, I think, had an influence.
They had to have certainly believed in what you were doing, too.
They did.
I mean, they saw this priest trying to build a great library, and just the circumstances of
being a Jesuit priest in an institution with not the greatest endowment in the United States, you know?
Maybe she believed in your commitment.
She did.
They did, rather.
Absolutely no connection at all with Jesuit order, with the Roman Catholic Church at all.
Nothing at all.
That's just me, and that's what I enjoy, being accepted as me, as Bill Monaghan, or Father Monaghan, or Monaghan, whatever you call me.
Father Bill.
Whatever.
It makes no difference.
The thing is that we're friends, friendship.
And so, you know, this happens.
Well, you must project this passion for books.
I do.
But also, I'm helping them, too.
I say, why don't I bring a friend to meet you?
In Chicago.
People, they didn't know him.
I want to bring a friend, a man who had lots of sources to buy books.
So, he said, we got to play with him.
So, I was a mutual help to each other.
How did you develop so many sources, so many friends?
How is it you knew people in Chicago that Marjorie and Ellen didn't know, for instance?
Let me tell you in terms of Rosenthal.
Bernie Rosenthal is now in Berkeley, a bookseller, a famous Rosenthal family, a great family.
As I'm thinking of things I want to show you, give you, this one, he said to me many times,
I can't do my work staying home.
I must, must travel.
And I say the same thing.
Travel is of essence to me.
So I would, they would say, now, Paul, Bill, when you get to Chicago, be sure to meet so-and-so.
Then a note or telephone call, or they'd be ready to see me.
Or going for the grocery store to work.
I'd be on the Goliath Club, or the International Biblical Files.
And you'd meet some people.
I'd meet people, saying, come to see us.
We're next time in Chicago.
Let's get together.
Or Detroit.
Come on.
Or Montreal.
Come on up and see us.
That's right.
I'm a child.
I'd like to do it.
So this led to one thing, to another, to another, to another.
And so that I, my contributions to our library are from Germany, from Canada,
from the United States alone.
Wonderful.
And let's talk a little bit about why are you the only person to have ever thought about an award to recognize Book Collective?
Well, it's just that I saw what the Royal Library of Sweden was doing, and I just thought that would be a good thing to do.
Now, it so happens that Mary Hyde was instrumental.
Mary Hyde.
Mary Hyde was instrumental in Princeton for a while, but they did it only occasionally.
But I kept it up every year.
And Norman Strauss told me this is a very key thing.
He said, Bill, I want you, you've given this point to me, 1968, but I want you to get the very best, because if you got the very best, you didn't get anyone then.
So, Rosenwald.
I've seen your list.
I mean, when I saw that list, I said, how can you beat that?
So it won't.
Well, Bill Shady is not Bill Shady.
That Mary, the Lady Eccles is not there.
That's right.
So you keep it up.
And you've also gone international.
You've picked a Japanese and a Canadian.
Sure.
And you won't have any problem getting it.
What are you looking for when you're looking for it?
You're looking for not just collecting great things, but I guess the willingness to...
Well, the understanding that what you're collecting is a— Well, it's personal.
You're really the custodian, not the owner, I guess.
Oh, yeah.
I think that even though you might have a legal ownership, the corporation of U.S.
South owns these things.
But over the years, things change, and institutions cease to become corporations.
But not just the institutions, but the private collecting.
he or she owns this exquisite item, owns.
It's in my library, it's on my shelf.
But this book is going to live, it's going to be around a lot longer than the human body is.
Besides, you see all these books, a history of decades or centuries of collecting.
And one thing that Nicholas Barker saw here, let me get the book and I'll show you.
It's an author.
Start again now.
Nicholas Barker.
I saw this book on ourselves, and the on its sign is our owls, four owls, five owls.
And it says Thomas Hollis.
Really?
H-O-L-L-I-S.
It was a 17th century Englishman who was a major donor to Howard College.
Really?
Four owls.
I'm just trying.
That's my owl.
Go ahead.
Five owls.
So, now, this came directly to us from a library form by two bishops in Portsmouth, Virchow and Cahill.
Virchow, and V-I-I-T-U-E-N-C-A-H-I-L-L, looks like Cahill.
Virchow and Cahill Library.
The English is called Cahill.
Okay.
And so this is a book of, oh, look at that.
This is a Thomas More book.
It's Lucian.
I use C-I-A-N-I, Luciani.
Actually, it's Lucian, L-C-I-A-N, and it's a translation by Thomas More.
Really?
Yeah, but it's not the person.
It's Lucian of Samosatris.
It's not the same guy.
Is it the satirist?
No.
Well, I'm not up on that.
I don't know.
Is this the Greek satirist, I wonder?
No.
I got to just say, honestly, I don't know.
I'm quoting him in my book, because he has the—no, it's a different one.
He's just a different solution.
But the thrilling thing for me was when people come to your library or my library, they say, oh, now listen, you say, what did you say?
I had this.
I didn't know it.
So what made it significant to Nicholas again?
The owls?
Yes.
Thomas Hollis.
He says, this is a book from the Hollis Library.
I see.
And this is the sign that you would have a signature.
This is a signature of the Hollis Library.
And the significance of Hollis was what?
He's the major, one of the major owners of the 17th century, through Harvard College.
Oh, okay.
Nicholas knew that straight away.
Yeah, right.
He's another enthusiast.
He's a man of genuine honesty with his friends.
As I say, he's a man of great poise.
As I say, he can be a room full of people.
He can sit down and look at that book and hear nothing.
So, I'd say, in fact, I'm a house guest of Brayden's book.
people, collectors, the wives or the husbands will say, we meet the finest people anywhere through this area of collecting.
It brings us together.
Trust costs all boundaries.
But it is interesting to go back to the award, because it does recognize the contribution of the private collector.
And you've taken a little bit of your time and your thought.
You've designed a gorgeous medal, which Sandy showed us,
And you're saying, you're giving a little something back to the collectors, you're giving recognition for their, for their, is it also with the hope that these collectors, not necessarily your library, but they will see fit to make sure that these collections go into public offices?
Well, I'll pre-site an example of a gentleman you met with yesterday, Sandy Berger.
He is thinking every day of his 10-book judgment of where the discussion is going to go.
It could be, I don't know where.
But he really needs a museum plus a library, because the glass you've seen, the Burne-Jones, it's a museum collection and book collection both.
So, I bet you'd go together.
I wouldn't.
You know, I'm there.
I'm among these friends.
And so, you just wait and see what's possible.
The thing is that the principle between us, I get recommended to other people, and I keep the circle going.
We discussed Sandy, but let's just not even say, how do you go about going up to an individual, an individual, and initiate a discussion about the ultimate
this position or this collection?
Well, the way you do it is by becoming friends with them for a long time.
Now, Otto Schaefer in Germany, I was his house guest in Germany, in Schweinfurt, in 1988, in July, in June.
And I said, Otto, what are you planning to do?
He says, well, I am planning to leave my lobby to the city of Schweinfurt,
a museum, it'll be like a Huntington Library in Oval, beginning by beginning, but he's a man of great wealth, but he'll fund it for not only for maintenance, acquisitions, for building maintenance, we'll also fund it for people who come to a fellowship museum to study.
So that's what his assist is to do, but because I've known him for so long, I can ask him these questions.
Start out the conversation, of course.
We're back.
But I wrote to him two years ahead, asking me to come to San Francisco to see the colors more metal.
His firm has plants in North America and other places, so he can fit in with his business.
He makes ball bearings?
Yes, ball bearings.
He's probably got the finest individual collection.
Well, Getty's got a pretty good collection of Getty in England, I'm told.
I would say his collection is considered one of the greatest.
It is.
Well, certainly in Germany.
Well, I mean, they say in the world, actually.
Well, it's hard to say greatest.
What is great for each quality of this man in Paris?
Chilet, Henri Chilet?
Sure, who has a manuscript collection, and principally both made of a manuscript.
And he is just as businesslike as any businessman ever.
He has people.
He's keeping record of how many manuscripts are of this way or that way that are available.
So the client comes on the market and says how rare it is immediately.
Isn't that interesting?
And he actually came personally to buy the Utopia at the Martin sale.
He was there.
Did he buy it?
Yeah, he did.
Big money.
A couple hundred thousand, I guess.
Well, his mother is a source of the money.
He owns the pharmaceutical plant.
So I've been in his house, but it was very difficult to see his library, because he would say, look at this, and then he'd move on to that.
So hardly any time to look at anything.
I wanted to sit down and look at something, but I'll show you this.
Have you considered him as a recipient of the award?
I would consider him.
I don't know if any public association has.
That's very important.
I mean, you have to have some kind of an orientation to the use of it.
See Scheide, for instance, for example.
I mean, that's at Princeton, but scholars go in.
And the Carlton Lake collection is at HRC.
I mean, that's part of the Humanities Research.
There's a guy out in St.
Louis, Brodsky, who's done this Faulkner collection.
What Faulkner?
Brodsky's got the finest Faulkner collection in the world, and he's deposited at this small college, Southwest something college in Missouri.
I'm going out to see him in September.
Maybe I'll send you something on him.
He's a very interesting man.
I'd like to know if I'd like to... He's a very, very interesting man, by the way, because he does... His point is to make this stuff available to scholars.
And, you know, there's another Faulkner collector by the name of Peterson that never made anything available, you know.
Well, you can help me a lot by giving me ideas for future candidates.
Oh, I will.
May I?
I wish you would.
It's because I've been... Part of my job has been to... Is there anything else... Is there anything I've missed, in your view?
Well, all you can do is, for a visit like this, you can get some misnamed reactions when I talk together.
Okay, and I want to read that, I certainly want to read that oral history.
I hope we have it in Massachusetts.
I should think Harvard would have a copy of that.
Well, you can take ours along and mail it back to us.
Can I do that?
That would be wonderful.
Why don't I take a look at the binder?
Okay.
This is probably showing us some
This is Latin American literature.
Borges.
It was a very successful symposium, and the purpose was to give an idea of the writers in Latin America since 65, because that was the Castro, not that they were affiliates of Castro.
Castro helped them express their work, and here's Borges.
B-O-I-G.
I have a friend in New York City who did this, Fuhrman Fink, F-I-N-C-K, F-U-R-M-A-N, first name, and he had Jorge's own whole apartment, and when he finished the portrait, Jorge was nearly blind, took the portrait and looked at him like that.
He said, oh, that's marvelous.
He said, could I sign it?
saying to the artist, can I sign it?
That's ruining the project.
Apparently, my guess is he probably told them, sign it here.
So that's what Borges signed it.
So we have it.
Oh, that's wonderful.
We bought it.
It's $3,000, knocked this down, but we have it.
That's great.
But Borges signed it, which is great.
Borges signed it.
So we have the project.
I love it.
I mean, if Borges wanted to sign it, why not?
He said the experience, he says, of being with that man was such a marvelous occasion for him.
Oh, he's one of the greatest living writers.
Yeah.
Now, these were—I have entertainment always.
This is the program before the reception's announced, I suppose, so Latin American people came.
But then we're coming into the program itself, and then these are—Monegal was at Yale, and he was a ham.
in the sense of, for the puppet.
He was being about 20s himself, 20s himself in the 1950s in Paris, as two fellows just going around having a lot of fun, and they went into various theaters, which caused a lot of trouble, which is just having fun.
So this is a quite a showman.
He gave us wonderful talks.
And this is Leal from the East Santa Barbara.
He died since.
But then all these are connected with collectors.
He was a collector, and we didn't get a chance to buy the library, but these are contacts, too.
And here's Kevin Stone.
This is Father's, did Ruth tell you about the symposiums?
This is major, major.
These people come from Arizona, from the East Coast and so on.
Black tie, I can see.
Oh yeah, that's part of it.
It's part of the thing getting dressed up.
They like to show their fine clothes and all.
I want to take your picture before we leave, if it's all right with you.
Yeah, of course.
So anyhow, these are, um, um, the follow-up, this one, I, I, I... These are more than a place for students.
You have to stimulate, because I formed these from, from here, from, from, from, uh, the, the library.
But if you like what I'm giving you, there's more where that came from.
Here's the library.
It's from Michigan, a very wonderful man from Michigan.
Wonderful.
That's great.
So music, everything, it's one experience.
We got a Borges book collection from one of the scholars.
I think maybe this is the man we purchased his collection of Borges.
So it's always connected with the library and helping us in one way or another.
Yeah, because they're supporting.
They are followed over many years.
There's Sandy.
Isn't that Sandy Bird?
No, no, it looked like him.
It kind of looked like him in profile.
Great.
Pat, why don't you start in 1955.
And my object was to reach the people in the community who support the symphony, the ballet, the opera, and the zines.
And she, the grand dame, said, Father Bill, you've done it.
Who's that?
Margaret St.
Aubyn.
S-T period.
A-U-B-Y-N.
Margaret St.
Aubyn.
And she's saying, Father, you've done it.
You've done it.
Meaning I reached out, and she helped me a great deal.
I'm what I am.
But she had the context, and she made sure that we got out to people.
And looking at these photographs of these various symposiums, you say, this is PR, my style.
My style, yeah.
These are fresh.
She's from Arizona.
But this is more than PR.
This is meaningful.
This is, you're doing something that's productive.
Yeah.
Yeah, it's kind of connected.
We have to, the library must be part of the community.
And then the menus.
We'd have the Dostoyevsky dinner, the Dostoyevsky dinner.
I love those.
Let me just read a couple of these for the Dostoyevsky dinner, which was in 1981.
Shout out to the whole world.
That's the continuing name.
No, it's the title.
We have cold cream of asparagus soup, veal, G-A-R-C-H-I-Z-A, broccoli, grilled tomato, creme de menthe sundae.
Also, in other words, you're trying to do the
Yeah, yeah.
Kind of cute.
And then Musogorski.
I'm sorry?
Then I would try to get themes from the writers or composers, some of the people who've used them.
There's the M-U-S-O-R-G-S-K-I-I dinner.
That was in 81 as well.
Oh, so you had these successive nights.
Yeah, it was too much.
Now we only have one dinner, and we had a small buffet.
Wow.
on Thursday night.
I was going to say, that's pretty ambitious.
But too much, too much.
But I couldn't listen to the common sense.
People said, that's too much.
Well, they're still coming, aren't they?
At the St.
Francis yacht club, I noticed, which is nice.
And this one is at the Pacific Union Club.
Well, that is a wonderful place to entertain.
One of the finest old mansions of San Francisco.
Which the?
That's wonderful.
I'm going to take a couple pictures, if it's OK with you.
The Rosenthal.
Oh, it's the Rosenthal.
He says, we're not like the Rothschilds.
The Rothschilds have the money.
So he gave a talk here, and the second time he was at Harvard, and the third time at the Newbury Library.
And in the keepsake, for occasion, you have the family tree, and Jacques Rosenthal of Munich was, in a sense, the ancestor.
This is the man who sold to the generation
of Temple and Crocker here, of Morgan in New York, and so on.
A great, great bookseller.
And the Olske firm is the female side of the family.
So, it would be the Roosevelt and Olske.
And so, this, then I have the whole family coming down, the generations coming in, and only the booksellers in the family, with many other families.
He's the booksellers members of the family.
So, and he is a dear person.
And I would love to have you know him, because he is a traveler, and the two of you should know each other.
Bernard Rosenthal.
And where is, where would I reach him?
In Berkeley.
Okay.
I went to Berkeley this afternoon, as a matter of fact.
And Rosenthal.
You ask Ruth, when leading, for that address or telephone number.
Okay.
Bernard Rosenthal, a bookstore in Berkeley.
But he is, now, I asked him, our friendship is such that he's given me many things for the library, some great manuscripts and so on, for the library.
And so I said, Arnie, I would love to have a collection of catalogues of your grandfather, Jacques Bosenthal, of Munich.
I said, I don't know if I can afford it, but he said, oh, poor God.
So he gave me a near-complete book.
A collection of it.
There was an auction in Germany that, what's the big auction in London?
Sotheby's.
Sotheby's had an auction, sawing off the things of an auction, in Munich.
This was during Hitler's time.
And the day before the reception, the Gestapo put on Jew in a Ura, Jew outside.
And people, this is, I can only say this without tears, but people came to pay respects to the family, and did look at the collection.
And, isn't it a touching thing?
But this is a great family.
It's a great family, and so... And obviously, it's a book family.
A book family, book family.
But these people, very successful, very successful, and, as I say, travels all the time.
The thing is, I'm probably, Ruth maybe can give me, if this is a little too tight to set up something for today or tomorrow, but maybe I can make contact with him, and I'm coming back, I think, in about two or three months.
Telephone call is enough just to make out who you are, and so on.
And he can help you a lot.
But a lot of people that you know, you can say, how about John Doe?
Yeah.
That's great.
But he's an excellent person.
We have tried to honor people who have done things with public benefit.
And Franklin Murphy, Dr. Franklin Murphy, he was Times Mirror paper in Los Angeles.
And he was the chancellor of the University of Kansas, UCLA.
And although he was a chancellor, he
really made it possible for the libraries to grow enormously in both, in both, both places.
So, uh, Murphy, we wanted him to tell him a fellow of our library associates.
Thank you.